Hi, this is Anthony Delao. And you're listening to episode one of prison perspectives, not your typical public entity podcast. On behalf of Prism. Thanks for tuning in on today's episode. We're talking about budgeting in a new fiscal reality and who better to talk about that than our very own Chief Financial Officer Puneet Bell. Punit. Take it away. Thank you, Anthony. Good afternoon, everyone. And I'm, I'm really excited to present to you the first prison podcast and talk about budgeting with our two panelists, Scott Mann and Nate Black. Our first Panelist is Scott Mann. He is an MB AC BO and a RM and he's the risk manager for City of Sunnyvale. Scott is an experienced risk professional and is a leader in business operation of municipal government and education entities. And one thing that I didn't know about Scott until this morning was that he's a US Navy veteran. Welcome, Scott our second time. Uh Oh, and Scott is also a vice chair of our uh prison finance committee. Our second Panelist today is Nate Black. He is a CPA and serves as the auditor controller for Sutter County. Nate is in charge of accounting budgeting and financial reporting for the county. And he's also the chair of our finance committee. Welcome Nate. And um thank you for your time. And um II I hope you're excited. As excited as I am to talk about budgeting in new fiscal reality. Thank you. Great to be here. Ok, I'm gonna start with some uh questions um on the um session, just some relevant questions. And the first question that I have for you too is about the budget, you know how, what effects have the state budget had on your um own budget being adopted. So I'm gonna shoot it to you first, Scott and then Nate, you can chime in with your perspective. Oh, thank you pee. I appreciate being here today and the opportunity to share my thoughts, you know, in addressing this question, I think it's important to start from a foundation of, of basics and briefly review some of those budget basics cause not everybody may be aware of it, but you know, by California Constitution, the governor is required to announce a budget uh every calendar year by January 10th. Um And then uh that budget announcement is obviously for the upcoming fiscal year. And so the state's budget calendar drives all of our public agency budget calendars no matter how large or small we are. And between January and may the legislative analyst office releases the analysis of the budget bill and addresses uh particular perspectives and issues contained within it also during the same time period, you have various lobbying activities by various groups that seek to support or oppose certain aspects of that budget. And adding to those dynamics, you have various legislation working its way through the approval process that can impact uh your budget. Um in particular, you know, we we have to be mindful of those ever presents unfunded mandates that get handed down to all of us from Sacramento from time to time. And after that process is concluded, the governor will issue a a may revise and then the budget moves on uh for presentation and adoption in California. What I like to say about the budgetary process is it's like making sausage. It's not pretty to look at, but in the end, it sure can taste good when it's all done. So similar to the state budget uh within your own agency, you need to have a focus on your agency's budget calendar um and be influential and contribute to that budgetary process. Uh You should know for example, what your agency's cost of risk is. Um for example, in my agency, uh my average cost of risk over the last 10 fiscal years is 1.54% of general fund expenditures. And you know, that's an important metric uh to have your hands wrapped around. Uh when finance develops the budget uh for the departments that are your biggest loss drivers, it's a way to apply the appropriate amount of risk in the budgetary process and it forces department leaders to have a, a skin in the games and control in terms of controlling their own costs. And so that's kind of how I I view uh the budgetary process. We should all have a budget calendar, however large and small and we should be influencers of that budgetary process within our own agencies. Nate, thanks Scott and uh great to be here as well. And Rick, uh thanks for setting this up. So the only thing I was gonna add to this first question was a little bit about the tenuousness of the state's budget in uh with relation to the economy. And it just, it, it real briefly how it works to make sure everyone's on the same page because if you're a school or a city or a county, um no matter uh which one you are, there are impacts obviously, um depending on how Sacramento does each year. And so, uh the, the three revenue sources are uh income taxes and that's broken up between individual and, and corporate um or business I should say and then uh sales tax and then they also benefit from property taxes through uh or era. So, um those taxes are more volatile than property taxes, property taxes is gonna grow at a pretty steady clip. We all are aware of prop 13 and that keeps that clip at 2%. No more than 2% if the property is uh still in the same hands year over year. And so, um, so anyway, we, we have a real steady property tax revenue stream in general. Um income, California sales tax and income taxes can take hits uh more so income taxes being the, and that's the primary revenue source for the state's ability to do business. And so, um, and we remember that back in, uh I think it was 2009 with Schwarzenegger issuing IO us. Um I don't know if you guys remember that, but that was because we were having an economic downturn and it was impacting significantly income uh tax revenues. So anyway, that's all I wanna say. I, I'm the Augur controller in Sutter County. So I, I do the budget for my department, but I don't do it on the Countywide basis. So I have a little bit less perspective here than for example, a cio might. Well, that, that um really leaves a nice segue into my next question. And you know, um both of you are welcome to respond to that. And it w which is how have declining public agency revenues such as transit occupancy, tax, sales tax, property tax, and enterprise funds impacted your ability to reserve for your outstanding liabilities during the pandemic. So, let's talk about this last year. And how have you managed to kind of uh reserve for what you have to pay eventually? Like workers comp general liability healthcare benefits, retirement and all that. So, um Scott, do you wanna take that first? Yeah, I'd be happy to, you know, this is a really good question and it sets up the argument to continue on a foundation of being fiscally conservative. Uh and, and having the responsible thing to do, you know, for actually determined uh reserves for various liabilities, whether it's worker's compensation, property casualty, health care plans, uh retirement uh payments, et cetera. It's crucial in my view uh to budget at the highest confidence level that your agency could tolerate whether that reserving is discounted for investments or not. And uh for example, if, if you reserve at an 80 or 85% confidence level uh versus an expected confidence level, when those unexpected expenditures uh come up throughout the fiscal year, you know, you have cash on your balance sheet that, that you can draw from if you need to um in in my agency by way of a specific example uh between the beginning of the pandemic and March of 2020 through the end of the fiscal year on June 30th. Um the early months of the pandemic, we took a nearly $25 million budget hit due to those lost revenues and tot sales tax enterprise funds. And we had to fill that budget void, you know, heading into the current fiscal year. Um because we were fiscally conservative with our confidence level, we were able to temporarily draw out uh $8 million from our work comp reserves in order to balance the budget with uh a plan to restore the that $8 million over a three fiscal year cycle. And while we made decisions to freeze certain unfilled positions, uh prevent employees from working out of class, reducing the amount of over overtime and things of that nature, those types of actions and others prevented my agency as an example from experiencing any uh employee layoffs. So this is an example of fiscal conservatism, providing a mechanism to be creative in order to fill a rather large budget gap and still deliver those crucial services to the community. Um You know, with that being said, uh Nate mentioned it a, a moment ago, you know, natives County controller auditor, I was wondering if you could maybe expound on uh agency revenues a little bit more. For example, why have our property tax revenues actually increased during the pandemic while other revenues have fallen? Thanks, Scott, I appreciate um you helping me on that one. I I and, and I'm gonna maybe talk a, a hair about the first question too as, as we get through this. But uh as I said, the property taxes really have been unaffected in California during this pandemic and for quite some time, um property property values remain strong. And so even though we've had to uh do all of the, the craziness with COVID-19, uh it it has still led California to have strong property values, uh, therefore strong property tax revenues. Whereas, uh, sales tax, income tax with the state and not, not local, but, uh, sales tax to, those are all contingent upon economic activity. And, uh, and, you know, uh, people moving about. And so, um, so in short, that's the reason why property taxes remain so strong. And so if you're looking at your city, uh revenue streams because different cities have different master tax exchange agreements with their counties. And so if you're low on um, the amount of property taxes you share, but high on sales tax, you're gonna be more volatile than if you're higher on the amount of property taxes you get for the parcels that are in your city versus, um, versus how much the county gets. So, does that make, uh, and any who, uh, so one other thing I'll mention on fiscal conservatism is that the time for a whole lot of it was, is already passed, meaning if, if you've gotten to this point today and you haven't already been working on reserving. And, uh, so for example, in Sutter County, uh for years now, we've been funding a pension side trust, the help of our unfunded pension liability. And, um, and so, uh, we couldn't start that now, that wouldn't be something that we could begin because we have too many other competing interests that are already in play. And, uh, so, so putting the new things aside because you really can't do a lot of new in these harder times. Um I, I agree with Scott that you still need to maintain fiscal conservatism in your reserving. Um 11 example of that in Sutter County is, uh uh so Cares, Act Cares Act for Sutter was $10 million. The city of Yuba City, which is a, uh has two thirds of our population of, of the whole county. Um, it only got less than a million like 900,000. And so, um that, that to me, I just want to mention that to you all because that's a huge gap, less than a million and we got 10 million. And so that $10 million we put half of it aside into our balance sheet, meaning we were able to use it to offset costs we'd already made during the pandemic. And so we just replenished our, our reserve. Um And so that, um so of the 10 million, we took about half of it and put it aside the other half uh largely we gave to the community to help them through it, businesses and whatnot. So, um Yeah, fiscal conservative. Yes. Thank you both. And uh Nate, I wanna talk a little bit more about fiscal conservatism with you and from the perspective of hard insurance market, you know how, um you know, you, the prison property liability, these two have been really, really hard to find insurance coverages and the premiums are going up and we are looking for, you know, creative ways of doing things here at prison and, but that, you know, indirectly impacts our members and the premiums have not been as stable as we would have liked them to be. How has the hard insurance and increase the premium impacted your ability to budget for premium and retention increases? You know, you, you, you're as a member are looking for ways to balance and make those premiums stable and some sometimes you have to bump up your retention. So how have you been able to do that? I'll bounce it to Nate first and then Scott, please chime in. Uh Thank you for uh I, I think that we've been able to, to work through it through, through, through previously um maintaining high reserving uh high confidence levels. And also, um this isn't necessarily great as far as applicable to everybody that's listening. But um I in other words, it could be a little unique to us but the, the, the products that are um the insurance products that are really in a pinch right now, like property um liability. They uh they're less of a problem for us to handle those increases than for example, the worker's comp the workers' comp increases over the last decade were, were significant. And so we kind of got used to that new normal and now they plateaued and are a little bit calmer. And so I'm not saying it hasn't been a, a problem but um with the Cares Act monies that we got and then um with at least not workers comp being the major problem, we've been able to ride the tide a bit. I don't know how useful it is. Scott might have a better perspective being in a city. So it's interesting that you mentioned the worker's compensation piece plateauing because isn't it a different world that we live in? That wasn't so many years ago where it was completely the opposite, right? And those of us who are in the business, um you know, we're always mindful of frequency and severity, but more so we're all more mindful lately of the frequency of that severity, uh especially over the last uh handful of fiscal years when you take into consideration, uh the hard insurance market that we're all faced with, you know, increased losses due to wildfires, excessive force claims, uh high dollar jury verdicts, uh hurricanes uh on the Gulf coast and on the Atlantic, flooding in the Midwest and storms of those types of things. Um those all drive up our premiums, but um you know, they've caused not only that, but they've caused major carriers to pull completely out of the market uh in California and the western states. And so it's difficult to get that placement um with the existing hard market conditions. And so when you go into the budgetary process for these types of things, you, you have to set your budget assumptions at, at a little bit higher um for various things, you know, uh Prism did a wonderful thing last fiscal year for its members by uh taking the estimated payrolls uh submitted by everybody and then discounting that payroll by 10%. And you, that was a good premium savings uh uh uh for us uh especially with the pandemic uh uh uh in place. And so what, what I like to do philosophically is we already talked about uh being conservative with the confidence level and setting it for whatever uh tolerance your agency has for it, but not only the, the reserving for those things, but you have to reserve also for losses. Um And I have a philosophy uh of reserving three general liability losses and three property losses in any given year, whether they occur or not. And uh to address the hard market within, within our agency, we actually made a conscious decision to uh increase our retention from 500,000 to 750,000 on the, on the liability side. And we're contemplating taking that to a million. So using that as an example, um reserving for three general liability losses and three property losses with an all risks deductible of 250 K, that's a total of 3 million that we have reserved on the balance sheet to absorb those losses within our retention level. And if those losses don't materialize over the fiscal year, you know, come, come into fiscal year time when you're closing out your budget, um, we're just gonna sweep those dollars in and carry those over to the next fiscal year and make adjustments, uh, as they come along. So, I guess to summarize that, I, it's important to continue to reserve at a conservative level and then looking at your loss history for all types of, uh, risk, uh, you really need to set aside uh money in your budget for however many losses that you think that you may incur in the upcoming fiscal year, whether you use them or not, great great ideas over there. You know, I I um you know, to our members who are listening to this podcast, I do suggest, you know, look at your retentions and um you know, get a, get a hub of natural to see what your reasonable retention should be. If you increase your retention, how much premium are you saving? Is that premium enough to cross off or more uh set off the losses that you will incur in that little increase in your retention? So do those kinds of analysis and then look at your books and see if you have questions like these like ideas that Scott and Nate have presented and see if it makes sense for you to change your retention higher or lower, whichever way it is from prison perspective. I'm gonna offer, you know, we've been in the business 40 years and the book is comp right? Was kind of, you know, not hard, but we we we've been there, done that the confidence levels were very important at that time too and they still are. So budgeting at a higher confidence level might seem like a pinch at that point of time when we are budgeting, but it saves you from a big sharp bite later. That's called an assessment. So, um we are following the same suit in the liability program. Now, you know, we are increasing our confidence level slowly and gradually. So it's not a big shock for the members in one year. But over a period of four or five years, we want to be at a reasonable uh confidence level that is, that will save us and our members from an assessment situation. OK. Thanks guys. Uh I have uh one more question and if time permits, maybe we'll take another one. But the next question is for you first, Nate, how have you used COVID and the change in environment that came with it as um to, to turn a negative into a positive, how have you focused on the opportunities in this time frame? So, uh yeah, I love this question. Um because that's what we should all be doing right now is uh this is the time to, for us to get creative, for us to think about how we've been doing business, how we could be doing business. Look at other entities or agencies and, and get creative. Um Also when you have a pressure point like this, you have such a, a significant increase in, in a program. Um It, that is uh the, there's that infamous saying, never let a crisis go to waste. And that's credited to Rahm Emanuel, former mayor of Chicago. And it, it's that, that sentiment is what we should be doing here, but in a very positive way. So let's not let this crisis be entirely a crisis. Let's find what we can, the silver lining out of it and, and turn some things around. So um and, and the, and the, the crises are, are numerous. Um So use the, so if you're not ac A O out there, um I would use this as an opportunity to get closer to the cao on insurance and, and um if you're a risk person, you are now more relevant than you were a year ago because the costs associated with the activities that you're responsible for are going up. And so the higher those go, the more uh let's say discussion should be had and or the more the cio should be looking to you for, hey, what's going on there? How, how can we help you, um you know, mitigate those increases or what can we do? And, and so um just that sentiment of, of, yeah, we all can look back at the last 12 months and, and um and be and I'm just talking about COVID, but the hard markets have been going now for a couple of few years um and insurance. And so we really do need to come on. We gotta turn around, talk to our colleagues in, in the agency and figure out what we could do better. And that all leads hopefully to um loss prevention, lost control, right? Where you haven't been able to get something through the county administrator, through the board. Sorry. Uh I, I always talk in county but um city manager, uh special district executive director, whatever it is is your, your, your leadership. Um This is the time to, to be creative, to do something different. Say, hey, remember that thing, we dust it off the shelf and try it, see what happens. Um IIII I have a tendency to ramble Scott, so I was gonna kind of pause and let you jump in. Well, I appreciate you mentioned the loss control, uh loss prevention and safety piece of this thing because um you know, risk financing, we've all had to take a hard look at our risk financing across the enterprise and uh sit back and question how we bundle our coverages. Uh Do we really need them? What are the appropriate retention levels and confidence level? We talked about that. But, but what, what this pandemic has been able uh enabled us to do is become more efficient with some of the tools that are out there. Uh on the market, like, uh I, I can't count on my uh uh I can't count how many documents that we have transitioned to a docusign format. Um You know, we're, we're in the process of building a new civic center. And so uh all of our old hard copy files, we're, we're scanning those in and we're keeping them in the cloud. Um All of those types of things. How do you deliver safety related training? You know, how do you, how do you maintain forklift certifications and see pr certifications for your classifications that require those uh types of things over a certain periodicity. How we deliver those services and keep employees trained to deliver the services to the community in a safe way really has been a challenge. Um But it's presented opportunity to excel and move the needle uh in, in, in capturing efficiencies in those areas. So I'm glad that you mentioned that. And the other thing I think I would mention is associated with the budgetary process that we've been talking. Um You know, the governor did announce in January that uh it was gonna have a $15 billion surplus. And so it'll be interesting to see uh what happens to that and how that gets uh uh obligated heading into the May revise. But we also have the $350 billion earmark for uh state and local governments from the American rescue plan. And we also have uh $50 billion earmarked for F MA um for emergency response related to COVID-19 expenditure. So when we're looking at uh what we've obligated and spent during the pandemic, uh we hope that those dollars will help restore uh our agency coffers and, and make us whole in that way and then, and provide another opportunity for us to be more efficient with, with those resources. And I know Nate, you know, this probably better than anybody else. But in public agency finance, you gotta be mindful of those one time dollars and you can't build programs around one time, one time revenue streams. Yeah, and, and using a windfall in a, in a crisis or in a difficult time using that windfall wisely instead of, hey, how can we, you know, what can we do that we haven't been able to do? No, I I don't think that's the, the right approach if you have a windfall. Like like again, we did with the Cares Act, you gotta put some of that away. You, you gotta be thoughtful about it and, and just in the context of insurance, um we pee has mentioned confidence level. We're, we're talking about confidence level a lot. I I'm a real fan of now. You stick with your confidence level. You don't, you don't drop it. You only go up right now because um you have to take the pain now and the longer you kick the can down the road um, the, just the more perilous it becomes the more risky. Uh, Scott, you mentioned raising your SI R right and setting aside, um, let's say three times the SI R for three claims that come in that year or whatever. Um, that I think, I think it's, it's a good option and it's something, it's a nice lever to kind of work to, to, um, to soften the blow a little bit. But I like that. You pair it with the reserving. So, yeah, I'm, I'm, we're gonna go, we're gonna take a more risk for a higher SI R but we're setting aside more money uh to, to fund, say three incidents that year, right? So, even though you're playing with the risk exposure, I agree completely with you, Nate. Great, great thoughts there. Um So we're, we're right on time um with the um the podcast recorded portion of this podcast. So now we're gonna stop the recording and this is the time for open forum and participation from all the attendees. So this is your chance to ask questions of our panelists and uh we'll take it from there. Thanks pit and a big thank you to our guest panelists, Scott Mann and Nate Black. If you're interested in joining us live for the next episode of Prison Perspectives in the open forum that follows immediately after be sure to check out more information at prison risk.gov/resources. This has been prison perspectives. I'm Anthony Delao and on behalf of prison. Thank you so much for listening and see you next time.